I had a holiday and they told me that you were going to be busy this month.
I'm trying to save up some time and not do anything.
The rest of the month, August too, to get back to work on that.
Now, is this going to be a continuation of the Albany cycle?
No, it's another in the cycle.
It's called Quinn's Book.
Q-U-I-N-N.
Apostraphe S.
And
I've sold it to Vikings.
I'm going to have a problem.
No problem.
Except this.
No, it won't pick up on here.
Let's just see.
I'll just put it close to you right there.
I'm sorry.
So we're talking about Quinn's book.
Well, it starts in 1849.
And it'll go somewhere to the post-Civil War era.
maybe even to 1880, I'm not exactly sure, about that range of time.
And it's a story of a couple, it starts off with a couple of kids, a boy and a girl, and as they grow up together, and it ranges over a lot of theatrical life, very canal life, civil war, home,
The descendants, I gather, of the people we've met.
Ancestors of George Quinn.
Antecedents.
Antecedents, I'm sorry.
That's exactly it.
But it's a more ambitious book in the sense that there'll be a larger scope of family life, the range of
Albany history will be suggested.
Certain families that we haven't quite met yet will be established.
Katrina's family, Taylor's, Ms.
Statz's, and a new line which will correspond to a latter-day political family.
I mean, I'm really... Pardon?
Any types of characters?
I mean, you've really made a mark.
Yeah, well, there'll be... There'll be some, I think there'll be some, you know, continuation of that... Demi-monde, or whatever you call it, where some of my people live, but
There's more to it than that.
There'll be, you know, there's an aristocratic line that's developed in this, there's an old Dutch family that, which is really the center of the structure of the story, revolve around one particular family and a continuity and a
Are we going to see more of the... How do you pronounce it?
Is it Phelan or Phelan?
Phelan.
That is a question.
There are a number of people around Worcester who have Phelan roots, and they said, ask him how he pronounces it.
Yeah, definitely.
A lot of people say Phelan, but that's not Phelan.
I mean, maybe it's pronounced that way some places in Ireland, but I never heard it.
It was always Phelan.
Around here, it was always Phelan.
Do you expect it to be getting back to Phelan?
You kind of left us in a quandary with him.
maybe not as far as you're concerned no I'm not I don't have any problems with him I know some people do but I may do something again with him I may go back and pick him up in a point before Ironweed I don't know I have no plans for that at the moment there is a there is a
A book that I started, well, I finished, I mean, it was really my first serious novel.
It's called The Angels and the Sparrows, and that's where Francis Phelan came out of.
Good, thank you.
The whole Phelan family and his return home, which is alluded to in both Billy and in Ironweed.
They have to be read as a pair.
I read things.
You know, I've read Ironweed first and Billy second.
I think they have to be read Billy first.
Well, I don't think they end in the same day.
It's a different point of view.
You do learn certain things about Francis and Billy that might be helpful, but you don't really need that.
I agree.
But I think that they're enjoyed better.
Oh, that could be.
I don't know about that.
Well, just chronologically, I mean, there were events with Billy that really bear on Ironweed, I think.
The meeting between the son and the father.
I'm going to bring off the turkey.
And I wasn't aware.
You know, I picked these things up just blind.
I mean, I'm going to start Ironweed, and then I love them so much, I'll let the others look in a week.
You know?
I think that the unities of time are very important to you in these particular books, the classic unities, or there's a joy scene in that respect, and one that's probably Aristotelian.
I am Aristotelian down here.
But...
The unity is fine.
Yeah, well, the sense of place and time, it seems that I was always, I was very much influenced at a certain stage by playwrights.
really that's what Aristotle was talking about, the theater, the poetry in the theater, as opposed to what we've come to think of the latter to the times in the communities.
But my feeling of
It was always important to see the dramatic nucleus.
I'd play it back on a larger machine.
We were talking about Aristotle.
Well, I'd rather... You know, your notion of talking about my feeling about the unities,
I don't know what direction to take that.
I don't know how your vision is.
Well, that was just an observation rather than a question anyway.
Well, I had the sense, though, when I was reading it, and I'm always aware of, you know, we've only gone through four nights so far, and it's really a tight, tight book.
I mean, we really have pared it down and focused on just a few days in this man's life.
Well, I'll be doing something quite different in the next book.
I think I was instructed in the short story and the drama more than in the sprawling 19th century novel when I first began to write, and I suppose that influence is still important to me.
I, you know, I also think about Joyce, he did Ulysses, 18 hours, is that it?
So much of The Sound and the Fury takes place in a few days, in a significant climactic time.
Have you had a chance to see the new Ulysses, which is just... I have not.
You just got mine.
No.
I just read the review again that Elman wrote in the Times, and I'm very anxious to get it.
Which is kind of curious, because I noticed he was one of the...
Well, you mean the fact that they let him review it?
Yeah.
Well, somehow, I think he's above the mob scene.
I mean, it's better to have his biased opinion than anybody else's unbiased, ill-informed opinion.
He's marvelous.
I just, I've been reading again, I mean, I read it almost all the time, his biography, which I was thinking about, and then dip in and out of it.
I just got the new one.
But I will get your list, because I'm curious, 5,000 errors.
So many of them are common.
Are they?
Is that what it is?
I mean, but what they have is on the right-hand side, you get two basic pages, and it reads in sequence.
And on the left side, they show you where they've made changes, and they've got a, it looks like hieroglyphics, and there's just a plethora of...
symbols to indicate overlays, underlays, transliterations, all that stuff.
Is it worth it?
I wanted to read it.
Well, Random's bringing out a trade edition of two years.
And I'm sure that would be priced at no bottom.
What is this one?
Two hundred bucks.
Oh, well.
I'm sure you can get me some review copy.
I have no time to review it.
Listen, so I'm very
I'm very curious to get into a couple of areas of life.
Sure.
I wonder, I mean, the extraordinary changes that have taken place in real life in the last year and a half, I guess.
Right.
Just about.
Have you reflected on these?
No, I haven't.
Mike Levitas at the Times keeps asking me to write a piece for him on the whole event, the changes, and how I respond to it.
But I don't feel comfortable doing that yet.
What I feel is that it's too new.
All I'll be doing is recounting a lot of interviews and things I've said.
I have no clear perspective on it.
I haven't stopped running yet.
I don't know if they're going to let me stop for a while.
This summer I'm really aiming.
I'm writing a piece now for Vanity Fair.
I presume Vanity Fair will like it.
I don't know.
I'm at a cotton club.
I have been on it for a year with that call that just came in.
They're still working on it.
They're still rewriting, redoing the dialogue.
They're doing what they call looping now.
Richard Gere is coming in on the 16th to do some looping, and I want to go down and watch and see what it's all about.
Do you enjoy this?
Yeah, I love it.
I love the movies.
I noticed you've got a VCR in there with tons of cassette tapes, so you must really watch them.
I watch them all the time.
We watched Yankee Doodle Dandy last time.
No, the VCR was important for working on Cotton Club.
I got tapes of it, and when I was rewriting, trying to, you know, giving Coppola notes on everything, and I mean, in the last month and a half, I worked, well, a month really, on the looping script.
We've probably changed 25% of the dialogue again.
How long have they planned this thing to run?
A standard length movie?
Oh, it's a two hour and a half movie total with credits for 220, 235, 40, something like that.
I don't know exactly.
Did you write your novels?
Did you visualize them as possibly being scripts?
No, no.
I know they've all been sold now, haven't they?
Well, no, they have.
But that doesn't mean... The main truck has not.
The other three have been optioned.
And I'll write them all.
But I feel that they have an integrity as novels.
There's no way of transferring them.
It's a huge problem to translate a novel to a movie.
I'm surprised, actually, that you'd want to do the film treatment film.
Or is this more or less protecting vested interest?
Well, it's that.
But it's also that I love the movies.
I always have.
I separate them very desperately from literature.
anywhere near as complex, or you can't get at the human being the same way in the movies that you can.
In a novel, I just finished the first draft of Legs, and what I left out is incredible.
It'll be six years to write that novel, it'll be three months to write the screen for me.
I mean, it's a boiling down, a reduction to a narrative line that makes sense, but with the same kind of dramatic power, I would hope, that certain of the scenes have.
What you lose is all the introspection, all the interiority of the characters.
The best you can get is a suggestion of it.
couched in some dramatic moment.
But you can't put that on the screen or else you'll put everybody to sleep.
You mentioned Link's a really extraordinary novel.
I think a few people would doubt that he is an evil man, a bad guy, and yet he's fascinating.
And he even has many likable qualities, which I guess is true.
Well, it started because he was killed in Albany, and he had become a local legend.
You must understand, Albany is a wide-open town.
I think I reflect that attitude in old Albany, the kind of prohibition history that we had in this town, the wide-open gambling.
That's evidence during the Depression, long after prohibition has ended.
Billy Salen, you get the same attitude.
I grew up with that.
I grew up with that world of nightclubs,
gamblers, the legends of the hoodlums, the interlocking power structure of the nether world and the night world and the
the political world that ran the city.
And so that became a fascination for me, the whole mix.
And Billy is the first real reflection on the political aspect of it.
But Legs being a, probably the prime celebrity out of the jazz age, television,
and being killed in Albany and having focused a good deal of his later years in Albany because he was persona non grata in New York City, that became fascinating to me.
And I set out to use him in a political novel, and he just took over.
His life was so complicated that when I began to track it,
I found it fascinating because he was such a celebrity.
That was the thing that really caught me, the fact that a gangster could be that much of a celebrity.
And as I began to explore his life and talk to people who were alive in his day and hanging out in the same places, the people who met him had this indelible memory of him.
It was like, where were you in Pearl Harbor?
That's how you opened it, actually.
They gathered to talk.
Right.
Absolutely, and those reminiscences are indelible in these people.
I had so many of them after a while, it became very, very strange to me.
Who was this guy?
Why was he important?
Why do we revere gangsters?
Why the hell am I writing this book?
Well, I think so.
I don't think I answer it to the satisfaction of a sociologist, maybe, but what that book is, the way it's structured is the way everybody looks at it.
I mean, if you look at Jack Diamond, he's not the center of consciousness by any means.
Marcus is.
But Marcus is also intersecting all the time with the way the press looks at him, the way they looked at him on Broadway in show business, the way Kiki looks at him, the way
the goose looks at him the way his brother eddie diamond now are these real are these peripheral characters genuine are they actual well his brother was real kiki and alice were real marcus marcus is a composite of a set of attitudes that i perceived to exist uh i based them in
a couple of lawyers.
Bill Fallon was his lawyer at one point.
He was the great mouthpiece.
He was on a Rothstein's lawyer.
He was also, Diamond also had a lawyer named Dan Pryor from Albany, but
And he's probably closer to Dan Pryor than anything else, but not in his private life or in his personal thought.
In his legal representation, yes.
He's a composite.
He's definitely a composite.
But he's meant to be as much a character and not just a reflection of my ideas.
Now, starting out with this, it's clearly not a biography, but it's biographical.
Is it largely biographical or apocryphal or both?
It's everything.
I started out to write a meticulously researched novel, historically accurate, and I found out that that was all but impossible.
All the sources are suspect.
The best you can do is amalgamate them and hope for the best.
I gave up trying to decide on who murdered who and who was responsible for these various assassination attempts.
I think I know some of the answers.
So you were looking for the sense of the man as opposed to the... Well, what I got after a while, what I decided after a while was to use all... I mentioned it, I think, at some point about
The journalists' lies and stories and the lies were the most interesting part of their memories.
And I began to use that.
I used the lies, I used the...
things that I knew were historically incorrect, if it suited my purpose.
The outline of his life is accurate.
He did shoot up the Hotsi Totsi Club.
He did go into exile.
He did create that booze and beer empire and the Catskills.
He was that terrible desperado racketeering and
terrorizing people in the mountains.
He did come to Albany to play.
He did have a girlfriend named Kiki Roberts and a wife named Alice and a brother named Eddie and so on.
And he hung out in Albany.
And a good deal of the detail of his time up here is very accurate.
He even had a house he stayed in in Aero Park for a few nights.
It's now known as the Lake Diamond House, even though it was meant as a hideout for Vincent Cole and his gang.
But by using it all, I felt what I was doing was discovering one of these myths in progress that we're constantly creating in this country.
People like Marilyn Monroe or Charles Lindbergh.
maybe Erhard or Joe DiMaggio or whatever, these people, Muhammad Ali, who get into the center of the public eye and win the affection of the people for some reason that is very complex.
It almost seems particular to that period, though.
I mean, it doesn't happen so much today.
We still have Muhammad Ali today.
Yeah, but Muhammad Ali, I don't think.
Well, in his time.
He's lived beyond the power to maintain the mist in its same heightened status, but he was the best known human being in the world at one point there.
And Marilyn, you know, I mean, she's not of the same age as Lindbergh.
These people who are creatures of the media.
I'm sorry.
Go ahead.
I was at the NBCC in January.
received your award.
I just loved you every month.
And the publishing industry wasn't too pleased.
Even your own house.
I mentioned it before.
I thought that was great as well.
We were embarrassed.
I mean, 13 houses out there that had some cycles.
It's a fact.
How can you explain the reluctant census?
I mean, I'm sure you've been asked this, but there are 13 houses too.
The reluctant census has been published.
Obviously, good.
It is literary.
It's been accepted.
People think marvelous things about it.
How do you explain this?
Well, I think that people were put off
by two things.
People meaning editors.
Editors, first readers, whatever, whoever it was.
I mean, good readers.
The first thing that happens is if you track it from Viking first, their rejection was really a mutual separation.
That has been not quite understood, and it's so complicated that
It really isn't worth the effort to go into it.
You had an editor and the editor left.
You had a new editor.
I don't really need all of this.
That's right.
But the thing is that their reasoning, I think, was different from everybody else's.
Their reasoning, I would think, began with the fact that I hadn't made money on Billy Phelan and that they felt that this being what it looked like was a downbeat book.
I don't think
Everybody read it seriously.
I think there's some very good people and editors at Viking.
But they got very skittish about it.
And they were going to publish it, but they were giving me an editor in Georgia.
And I felt that that was unacceptable.
That got their nose out of joint when I said no to that editor, even though she was a very good editor, but she didn't come to New York for two months.
I might as well not have had an editor.
I mean, just the actual working out of editing the copy as it went along, I didn't feel I needed that much editing.
But that feeling...
You know, they didn't do well with Billy Phelan.
They handled it right.
And Billy Phelan was perceived now by some people to be my best book.
Some people feel that way.
I don't.
I like Billy Phelan.
I mean, I love Billy, but I think
I think more seems to happen in Billy.
Not that that's a necessity.
I don't know, it's hard to pick between you two, but I think they should be read whole, and I think they're really two parts of one book.
Maybe I'm going on that.
They certainly have parallel, there's no question about that.
Well, they're meant to be, and they, for whatever reasons, you know, people...
Didn't like that book.
It didn't get the attention that it's gotten since.
I mean, it's sold enormously well ever since.
All the books are selling very well.
But once that happened and I parted company with Viking, then suddenly you have that cloud over you, you know, which every editor is going to say, well, why didn't Viking do it?
You know, and so you get this, you look at it that way, that's one way of saying it, but the other way is that they figure it's got a black mark on it, and they look first for the black mark.
What do they find?
Do they know that it's gone through such and such a house?
Well, they know if I'm... You're a Viking writer.
Right.
Now you're over... A lot of them called my editor, previous editor, and said, what's the story?
How come you're not running?
And he got to what?
What he said, I had no idea.
Are you bitter about this?
No.
No, no, I'm hardly bitter.
I think Viking has done wonders for the books.
Did you ever lose faith in yourself as a writer?
No, I never did.
I have trying times, certainly, in seeing the book, too, with press, but I mean, in terms of any second out, well, Jesus, what did I do wrong with this book?
Were you ever plagued by any thoughts like this?
Not like that.
My thought was more along the line of...
All right, I've written this book.
I believe in it the way it is.
I think it's as good a book as I'll ever write up to this time.
I've ever written up to this time.
Maybe I'll write a better one.
But if this doesn't work, then something has happened to the world, not to me.
And I made a speech to that effect in the middle of all that depression.
I was given an honorary degree by Russell Sage College.
I wrote a speech in which I spoke about the stolen world, the world that I grew up in, a literary world that offered me extraordinary possibility coming into the world of
Faulkner and Thomas Wolfe and Steinbeck and the world of Hemingway and so many other marvelous writers.
The magazines were full of Bernard Malamud's short stories and I mean things like the Saturday Evening Post were publishing marvelously good writing.
The Atlantic was publishing more and Harper's was publishing more.
There were more magazines around it.
And suddenly all that faded away and it became very much a subdued culture and subculture.
And the world of big bucks began to move in on the publishing world.
It's ebbing somewhat now, they say.
That's right.
They haven't made the kind of profits I think they want.
It's an adage that you hear so often from publishers that a good book will always be published.
Do you believe in that?
Well, I believe that if something happened to me in the middle of all that trouble and
If I had dropped dead one afternoon, I don't think Ironweed would have been published.
I mean, maybe someday somebody would have come along and written some essays about Billy and Legs.
I don't know.
People are always writing about obscure writers, dredging them up and looking in the attic and the trunks.
That's like a Pharisee.
Right.
Example thing.
Yeah.
Well, you don't know about the novels that
molded away in the trunk.
I had a student once who gave me a novel to read.
And I read it and I thought, gee, this has got a lot of potential.
It's a pretty interesting book.
And the next class I came around, she died.
She was in her late 60s or something, or middle 60s.
And I didn't, or maybe I didn't know it right away.
And so she'd been working on and off for a good many years of her life and it didn't come to pass.
I think that's a comforting old wives tale that the publishing industry and certain arrogant writers would like to have us believe, but I don't believe that it's true.
I believe that
A great deal of bad luck goes without recognition.
And the exceptions are not the rule by any means.
You already had three novels behind you.
Let's say I and we didn't.
Oh, yeah.
Sure.
Oh, that wouldn't have stopped me.
I mean, I felt that sooner or later I'd get it published somewhere, somehow.
Maybe I'd have to write another book.
But I have much too much invested in a life of writing to have them
allowed that to stop me.
I wouldn't know what else to do.
You knew it was good.
I felt it was good, and I had some very good readers around me, people at the university, some friends who were very enamored of it.
And then people up at Cornell were publishing it piecemeal, and their response was extraordinarily supportive.
I think the title, Ironweed, says a lot about the people you look to for inspiration, for good at them, and perhaps it is these same characters which might have lent it in reluctance on the part of publishing.
Tell me something about these particular characters, the characters of Ironweed, to some extent relate.
Not so much in the intro, which I'm halfway through, I just got my poop smutting.
That is a decidedly non-Albany novel.
I think it has been said that all your novels are set in Albany.
Well, that's not entirely true.
Although I haven't finished yet.
You'll go back in time and there's a certain set of historical realities.
Right.
Temporary to the time it was written.
But there's some history that's definitely Albany history, however nonspecific it is.
I did put a little introduction, I don't know if that was in the galleys, just a paragraph stating that these,
The dynamics are Albany dynamics.
It's definitely... Well, it should be there.
Maybe you just... It's only a paragraph in the front.
But... This is something written for this particular work?
Just for this edition.
Otherwise, it's not changed.
I mean, the design elements have changed, but that's about it.
I'll show it to you.
I'll get the intro and show you.
Anyway, the... We're talking about the characters and... Which some people might call bums and lowlights and vagrants and down-and-out-ways, whatever.
There's an old slate of descriptions that can apply to them again.
Right.
Well, I've talked about this to some degree.
I have never...
I don't think I've exhausted my attitude towards it, but one of the things I feel is that I'm dealing with extreme people for a reason.
And I'm able to find in them the extreme conditions which illuminate that life far more
effectively through this drama of ultimate destiny that we find in people who carry their lives on beyond the norm diamonds was certainly that kind of a character billy phelan
in his kind of belief in his own set of moral principles, he discovers how very different he is from the rest of the people and what a different set of morality, or the morality of the politicians, how different it is from his own.
Francis, of course, is probably the most extreme case, carries himself out of the family, out of his family, out of his own history, out of his own world, into this kind of vagrant life, and never quite understanding it, never able to accept it, and always trying to come back, and finally coming back.
You see what I mean?
The notion of extreme is very important to dramatizing anything, I believe.
The tepid lives of the not very desperate masses are not the stuff of drama, as far as I'm concerned.
You can get novels of manners, social custom and so on, a good many of the short story writers of the age are dealing with that sort of thing.
But when you get to think about Chekhov,
You know, you find lives carried to degrees that suddenly worlds are expanded.
Are these people that you knew when you were writing?
I can't tell you this in Albany.
Some people are, you know, I grew up in this city and have seen a great many elements of its life.
because I was a journalist.
And I think that that served me extremely well.
I never had a loss to what to write about next.
The world of research that I did into Old Albany and the articles that
prompted that book back in the 1960s when I worked on it just had given me a sense of history and a sense of the kind of characters who have done extraordinary things in the world not necessarily very well known people but Diamond was a celebrity Billy Phelan was an extreme character and
He was patterned after an old uncle of mine, but my uncle didn't ever get into the situation that really Salem got into.
But the quality of his life and his attitudes were to somewhat, to some degree, patterned after him.
And he lived in that period, which I thought was a really extraordinary time.
Well, you write quite a bit about that period, the 20s and 30s.
Tell me about your fascination for that period.
Is it a fascination?
Now it seems you're going back in time, that century.
Right.
I feel that there's a city here that's laid bare.
for me to just explore in every way I want to and 1849 was an arbitrary year nothing particular was happening that I wanted to deal with in that year but I wanted the children to be of an age so that I could I'm pegging things to
come to climax in 20 years later, 25, 19, 18, whatever, years later, so I just picked 1849.
Turns out to be a very fascinating year.
The 30s?
Well, I do feel like you're in a timewater person.
No, I feel that I, you know, it's...
It started with legs.
I was going to write about the political machine, as I mentioned, and I had no particular reason to limit myself to the 30s.
But I started to think about that kidnapping of Dan O'Connell's nephew, which is good background music for Billy Salen.
And then I began to think about legs, and those were both centered in 1931, 33, 29, whatever.
The kidnapping was 33, Diamond comes from 27 to 31 in Albany.
So that period became important for that research, and when the research began to take me over, I thought, you know,
I felt I knew a lot about the age, and I continued to feel immersed in it after I finished Legs, which is why I went on to do Billy.
And Francis was a consequence of Billy, so it's sort of serendipity.
He's a terrible character.
Billy, but he was so strong to me.
Which raises the father-son's theme.
I mean, is this an actual...
Is this something that you feel that you're exploring?
Well, it certainly was pervasive in Billy.
Every phase of Billy is that.
In Ironweed, it's different.
and he has a relationship with his mother and his father that's significant but who doesn't but that's not the emphasis of the book the book is basically a book of redemption and uh
Well, Billy is a book of games, gameplay.
And there's a major difference in that.
Billy is pervaded by fathers and sons, and Francis' book is pervaded by this...